Life is what happens when you're busy making other plans.
The greatest glory in living lies not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall.
The future belongs to those who believe in the beauty of their dreams.
The battles that count aren't the ones for gold medals. The struggles within yourself—the invisible battles inside all of us—that's where it's at.
Tell me and I forget. Teach me and I remember. Involve me and I learn.
In the end, it's not the years in your life that count. It's the life in your years.
If you look at what you have in life, you'll always have more. If you look at what you don't have in life, you'll never have enough.
Never let the fear of striking out keep you from playing the game.
Life is either a daring adventure or nothing at all.
Few things can help an individual more than to place responsibility on him, and to let him know that you trust him.
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—I took the one less traveled by, And that has made all the difference.
You miss 100% of the shots you don’t take.
Life is not measured by the number of breaths we take, but by the moments that take our breath away.
It does not matter how slowly you go as long as you do not stop.
Remember that not getting what you want is sometimes a wonderful stroke of luck.
Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter.
Dreaming, after all, is a form of planning.
Life is what we make it, always has been, always will be.
The only way to do great work is to love what you do.
The journey of a thousand miles begins with one step.
What you do speaks so loudly that I cannot hear what you say.
The power of imagination makes us infinite.
Don’t count the days, make the days count.
A year from now you may wish you had started today.
Do, or do not. There is no try.
Not everything that is faced can be changed, but nothing can be changed until it is faced.
The way to get started is to quit talking and begin doing.
Change will not come if we wait for some other person or some other time. We are the ones we’ve been waiting for. We are the change that we seek.
Be who you are and say what you feel, because those who mind don't matter and those who matter don't mind.